ABSTRACT
Objective: To understand the experience of finitude from people with advanced-stage heart failure. 
Method: Phenomenological study conducted in a tertiary referral hospital in cardiology, in Fortaleza - CE, from August 
to  October  2022. The  participants  were  11  patients  with  advanced-stage  heart  failure.  Data  collection  was  conducted  
through  semi-structured  interviews,  and  the  speeches  were  recorded  and  transcribed  for  analysis  using  Heideggerian  
hermeneutic circle. 
Results: Of the 11 participants, eight were men; ages ranged from 43 to 82 years. The results were processed through 
the hermeneutic reduction process, which allowed the construction of two categories: (1) Being-with the other in heart 
illness and finitude, consisting of meanings related to the patients’ physical conditions, their limitations and possibilities, 
and their interpersonal relationships, (2) The construction of being-toward-death, in which patients spoke about their 
fears, anxieties, perceptions, and concerns in the face of finitude. 
Final considerations: The person with heart failure in the perspective of finitude experiences a phenomenon marked by 
the lack of information about the severity of the disease and the proximity of the end, which hinders the communication 
of their needs and conscious choices, resulting in an inauthentic existence. 
Descriptors: End-of-Life Care; Heart Failure; Nursing; Fenomenology.
RESUMO
Objetivo: Compreender a experiência de finitude de pessoas com insuficiência cardíaca avançada.
Método:  Estudo  fenomenológico  realizado  em  hospital  terciário  de  referência  em  cardiologia,  em  Fortaleza  -  CE,  de  
agosto a outubro de 2022. Os participantes foram 11 pacientes com insuficiência cardíaca em fase avançada. A coleta de 
dados deu-se mediante entrevista semiestruturada e os discursos foram gravados e transcritos para análise por meio do 
círculo hermenêutico heideggeriano.
Resultados: Dos 11 participantes, oito eram homens; a idade variou entre 43 e 82 anos. Os resultados foram trabalhados 
por  meio  do  processo  de  redução  hermenêutica,  que  permitiu  a  construção  de  duas  categorias:  (1)  Ser-com  o  outro  
no adoecimento cardíaco e finitude, constituída pelos significados relacionados às condições físicas dos pacientes, suas 
limitações,  possibilidades  e  relações  interpessoais,  (2)  A  construção  do  ser-para-a-morte,  na  qual  os  pacientes  falam  
sobre seus medos, angústias, percepções e preocupações diante da finitude.
Considerações  finais:  A  pessoa  com  insuficiência  cardíaca  em  perspectiva  da  finitude  vive  um  fenômeno  marcado  
pela ausência de informação sobre a gravidade da doença e proximidade do fim, o que dificulta a comunicação de suas 
necessidades e escolhas conscientes, resultando em uma existência inautêntica.
Descritores: Cuidados de Fim de Vida; Insuficiência Cardíaca; Enfermagem; Fenomenologia.
RESUMEN
Objetivo: Comprender la experiencia de finitud de las personas con insuficiencia cardíaca avanzada.
Método: Estudio fenomenológico realizado en un hospital terciario de referencia en cardiología, en Fortaleza - CE, de agosto a octubre de 2022. Los participantes 
fueron  11  pacientes  con  insuficiencia  cardíaca  en  fase  avanzada.  La  recolección  de  datos  se  realizó  mediante  entrevistas  semiestructuradas,  y  los  discursos  fueron  
grabados y transcritos para su análisis mediante el círculo hermenéutico heideggeriano. 
Resultados: De los 11 participantes, ocho eran hombres; las edades oscilaron entre 43 y 82 años. Los resultados se procesaron a través del proceso de reducción 
hermenéutica, lo que permitió la construcción de dos categorías: (1) Ser-con el otro en la enfermedad cardíaca y la finitud, constituida por los significados relacionados 
con las condiciones físicas de los pacientes, sus limitaciones y posibilidades, y sus relaciones interpersonales, (2) La construcción del ser-para-la-muerte, en la cual los 
pacientes hablaron sobre sus miedos, ansiedades, percepciones y preocupaciones frente a la finitud. 
Consideraciones  finales:  La  persona  con  insuficiencia  cardíaca  en  la  perspectiva  de  la  finitud  vive  un  fenómeno  marcado  por  la  falta  de  información  sobre  la  
gravedad  de  la  enfermedad  y  la  proximidad  del  final,  lo  que  dificulta  la  comunicación  de  sus  necesidades  y  elecciones  conscientes,  resultando  en  una  existencia  
inauténtica. 
Descriptores: Cuidados al Final de la Vida; Insuficiencia Cardíaca; Enfermería; Fenomenología.
INTRODUCTION
Cardiovascular diseases are the leading cause of 
death worldwide and nationally. It is estimated that by 
2040, there will be a 250% increase in these events in 
Brazil(1). Heart failure (HF) requires large public expen-
ditures and causes multiple losses to patients and their 
families(2). Patients who progress to advanced-stage HF 
often face the exhaustion of disease-modifying thera-
pies, physical limitations, loss of autonomy, exacerbation 
of symptoms, and approaching finitude(3). 
Patients with heart failure often require palliative 
care (PC), an approach that promotes the quality of life 
of patients and their families when faced with prob-
lems associated with life-threatening diseases; that 
prevents and alleviates suffering through early identi-
fication, proper assessment, and treatment of pain and 
other physical, psychosocial, and spiritual problems(4). 
However, access to palliative care for patients with HF 
remains a challenge(5). 
There is a significant gap in knowledge about end-
of-life care for patients with heart failure, with barriers 
related to recognizing terminality and late integration 
of palliative care, especially when compared to other 
chronic conditions, such as cancer(6).
Many healthcare professionals are reluctant to dis-
cuss prognosis and end-of-life care with patients with 
heart failure, and may not feel comfortable addressing 
these topics, which can delay the implementation of 
palliative care(7). The transition of patients with HF to 
palliative care is still complicated, and there is a diffi-
culty in addressing this topic in the early stages of the 
disease, in addition to the lack of integration between 
curative and palliative care(8).
The experience of people with advanced-stage 
heart failure involves a difficult prognosis, and nurses 
need to identify the specific needs of this popula-
tion. Understanding the experience of people with HF 
from a finite perspective can allow the development 
of interventions that promote person-centered care, 
humanized assistance, and respect for patient autono-
my, valuing shared decision-making and contributing 
to the consolidation of palliative care for patients with 
heart disease. Thus, the guiding question of this study 
was: “How does the person with heart failure in the 
perspective of finitude experience it?”.
Thus, the study aimed to understand the experience 
of finitude of people with advanced-stage heart failure.
METHOD
Study design
This is a qualitative phenomenological study based 
on the theoretical and philosophical assumptions of 
Martin Heidegger, according to his work Being and 
Time(9). Phenomenological research seeks the essence 
of the phenomenon through the experience report 
of the being studied. The researcher approaches the 
being and seeks to look at the phenomenon as it shows 
itself in its own experience, seeking to understand the 
phenomenon that presents itself to consciousness(10). 
In this way, the Heideggerian framework allows the 
researcher to immerse himself in the experience of the 
person with HF from a perspective of finitude, bringing 
them closer to its essence and meaning through the 
discourse of Being-there.
To ensure the quality of the study, the Consolidated 
Criteria for Reporting Qualitative Review (COREQ) guide 
was used, a 32 item checklist distributed in three do-
mains (Research team and reflexivity; Study concept; 
Analysis and results) for interviews and focus groups, 
adapted to Brazilian Portuguese(11).
Study location and setting
The research was conducted in a tertiary public 
hospital, a reference in cardiopulmonary care, from 
August to October 2022. The study settings were the 
hospital wards with patients with advanced-stage heart 
failure. The institution was chosen since it offers all the 
high-complexity procedures and serves patients from 
the 184 municipalities of Ceará and the North and 
Northeast regions of the country. 
Participant selection criteria
The study included hospitalized patients over 18 
years of age and who met criteria for advanced-stage 
heart disease according to the Supportive and Palliative 
Care Indicators Tool (Brazilian version) SPICT - BR, func-
tional class III/IV of the New York Heart Association 
(NYHA), heart failure or extensive and untreatable cor-
onary disease, as well as refractory symptoms despite 
optimized therapy(12). It is important to note that, despite 
meeting the SPICT - BR criteria, the patients were not 
being monitored by a palliative care team, even though 
the institution has such service.
Patients who were unconscious or disoriented were 
excluded due to their inability to respond to the ques-
tions. The focus of phenomenological research is on 
the described phenomenon and the understanding 
of the experience, therefore, data saturation was used 
as the criterion for concluding the interviews. Data 
saturation is a dynamic phenomenon that emerg-
es from the recurrence and density of the collected 
nformation, ensuring the robustness and consistency 
of the qualitative findings, and it is a continuous process 
that involves the reflective judgment of the researcher 
during data analysis(13). The sufficiency of the material 
was demonstrated through the repetition of the themes 
in the participants’ statements.
Thus, according to the inclusion and exclusion cri-
teria, 11 patients with heart failure in the context of 
finitude participated in the study.
Data collection – The phenomenological encounter
Entering the world of the Being in heart illness at 
the end of life requires personal preparation from the 
phenomenological researcher to establish an approach 
favorable to the opening of the Being-there. It is im-
portant to note that the researcher approached the 
participant in an empathetic manner, to express re-
ception and acceptance; the interviewee was informed 
about the study’s objective and the voluntary nature 
of participation, so that the report of their experiences 
and perceptions would be as authentic as possible. The 
interviews were conducted by a female doctoral stu-
dent with extensive experience in qualitative research. 
In this context, the interviews were grounded on 
the following guiding question: “What is your under-
standing of your heart illness?”, which aimed to unveil 
the condition of being cast into a serious heart disease 
with no prospect of clinical change. The statements 
were recorded for later transcription and analysis. Some 
participants had access to the transcribed material (they 
provided feedback on the results), while others did not 
due to the impossibility of contact after data collection 
period. Family members and companions were kept 
distant at the time of the interview to preserve the 
participant’s privacy. Each participant was interviewed 
once, and each meeting lasted an average of 40 minutes.
Data analysis and treatment 
The narratives were understood and interpreted 
through the Heideggerian hermeneutic circle, which 
is composed of the previous position, previous vision 
and previous conception. The previous position com-
prises the initial stage, indicating that the interpretation 
already has a position that allows the horizon of the 
articulations; the second moment, called the previous 
vision, is the perspective from which the set of artic-
ulations is viewed and approached; and the previous 
conception, the third moment, consists of the under-
standing of the set of previous positions and visions(7).
The care of the phenomenon followed this circle in 
search of the meaning behind the hidden phenome-
non, or the truth as aletheia, a Greek term that means 
unveiled and was revisited by Heidegger in his work 
Being and Time(9). The hermeneutic circle consists of in-
terconnected stages that allow a continuous movement 
enabling the understanding of the whole from its parts 
so that the researcher can grasp the meaning behind 
the statements, getting closer to the true presentation 
of the experiences(10).
Heidegger(9) highlights that the rational concept of 
truth consists of the agreement or adequacy of knowl-
edge to its object; in his thinking, truth is the Being 
and the uncovered Being by the entity itself, it is what 
allows itself to be seen from within itself, that is, what 
is unveiled; truth is a presentation of things, and not 
a representation.
To proceed with this unveiling, it is necessary to 
consider that Being can only be understood if revealed 
in its existential horizon, which here occurred through 
the existential plot that involves each study participant, 
understanding their experiences in the time and space 
of cardiac illness.
In this way, the participants’ statements were fully 
transcribed and read repeatedly, seeking to immerse in 
the participants’ experience, to grasp the content and 
to recognize the themes addressed. Subsequently, the 
statements were divided into meaningful segments, 
respecting the pauses and the thematic changes in 
the statements.
The segments extracted from the interviews were 
analyzed in search of latent meaning and, subsequently, 
these units of meaning were grouped by similarities 
and proximity of themes and experiences, giving rise 
to thematic categories.
The interpretative analysis of the categories occurred 
in a circular movement between the empirical data 
and the Heideggerian theoretical framework, which
allowed the phenomenon to be understood in its ex-
istential depth, revealing the meanings underlying the 
experience of Being in the context of cardiac illness 
from the perspective of finitude.
The  participants’  statements  were  coded  with  
numbers and only the researcher had access to the 
interviewees’ names to guarantee anonymity; this data 
management was done using Excel. However, no soft-
ware was used for data analysis and categorization.
Ethical aspects
All ethical and legal precepts of research involving 
human beings were respected, and the project was 
approved by the institution’s research ethics commit-
tee, Opinion No. 4.975.015/2021 and all who agreed to 
participate signed the Informed Consent Form (ICF).
RESULTS
Of the 11 participants, 8 were men; ages ranged from 
43 to 82 years old, 8 were Catholic, 2 were Evangelical 
and 1 practiced Umbanda. All had been hospitalized for 
more than 15 days; the longest hospitalization among 
the patients was 60 days; 9 had previously been hos-
pitalized due to heart disease and only 2 were in their 
first hospitalization. The patients’ income ranged from 
no income to 3 minimum wages, with an income of 1 
minimum wage predominating. Only 2 patients were 
unaccompanied in the hospital and among those with 
companions, wives and daughters were the most com-
mon companions. 
The process of hermeneutic reduction gave rise 
to two categories: Being-with the other in cardiac ill-
ness and finitude and The construction of being-to-
ward-death (Figure 1).
The category Being-with the other in cardiac illness 
and finitude was composed by the meanings related to 
the physical conditions of the patients, their limitations 
and possibilities, and their interpersonal relationships, 
whether with family members, professionals, or other 
patients. The following statements refer to the limita-
tions experienced by the patients.
If you get ill and can no longer do your things, it 
becomes a burden and you suffer, it’s really bad. 
(Participant 04)
Not being able to work properly, not being able 
to go for a walk because if I walk 50 meters, I get 
tired. That’s it, not having the freedom to do what 
I want, I have to be restricted, and I’ll be even more 
restricted. (Participant 08)
In addition to the limitations described, the patients 
also talk about their relationships with other people, 
whether professionals, family members, or other pa-
tients. Some of these statements point to loneliness, as 
sometimes these patients do not have the opportunity 
to talk, which corroborates the silence and misinfor-
mation about their health condition.
 have two children, but that’s the least of it. They live 
their lives, and I live mine. (Participant 08)
I think you are a person of God. Who comes to talk 
to the patient. There are patients here who don’t get 
a visit from a nurse, they just give them a pill and 
that’s it. (Participant 04)
I need help with the pumps. Bathing, I do it by myself. 
But sometimes I want to go early in the morning, and 
that lady there is sleeping [the patient’s companion 
next to me], so I won’t wake her up. (Participant 05)
In the second category, The construction of the 
being-toward-death, it is possible to perceive the pro-
cess experienced in search of the construction of the 
being-toward-death. 
The medicines are good and I ask God to give me 
peace of mind until the day I leave this Earth, be-
cause He is the Father. (Participant 01)
I prefer it to be like this, when the day comes when 
I go (die) and He wants to take me, that is how it is 
too, because I don’t want to depend on others or on 
medication [...] people say: ‘oh why are you going 
to keep taking medicine for the rest of your life? I 
won’t’ [...] I have faith in my Father that soon, soon 
He will put an end to it. (Participant 06)
He died all at once (the patient’s mother), it wasn’t 
a burden. It was too beautiful (death). It was good 
because it wasn’t a burden. (Participant 04)
In the following excerpts, the patients talk about their 
fears, anxieties, perceptions and concerns regarding 
the finitude and limitations related to cardiac illness 
and the consequences of this condition in their lives.
I was very sad when I found out about this disease, 
because I thought it was all over, right, because 
the doctor said I couldn’t do this, couldn’t do that, I 
couldn’t... then it was sad. (Participant 03)
Disgusted because I still have a lot to live for, many 
years ahead. (Participant 05)
I’m afraid of being dependent on others, right?! 
(Participant 06)
I’m not afraid. If God takes me, I don’t care either, 
I’m not afraid at all. (Participant 09)
The interviewees also express their regrets and 
frustrations,  as  well  as  their  perceptions  of  the  life  
they’ve lived.
I used to work a lot and now I’m seeing that I didn’t 
need to. Whenever I had work, I would work all 
day.  I  regret  some  efforts  that  I  shouldn’t  have  
made. I’m going to work less and free myself more. 
(Participant 08)
My life never had a good period. (Participant 03)
I was killing myself over things that weren’t worth 
it. (Participant 10)
Participants also discussed the lack of knowledge 
about their health condition, often referring to concerns 
and anguish in the face of events that unfold and cover 
up the phenomenon experienced.
They [the team] are very complicated. One day I have 
one illness, another day another, then another, then 
another. And my head is confused, not knowing 
what I have. (Participant 03)
I have to keep coming to the doctor, I have been 
doing it all the time, I am being treated, and it had 
only been a month since I went to the doctor, but 
he saw these problems and didn’t say anything. So, 
I am tired. (Participant 07)
Based on these findings, in the light of Heideggerian 
phenomenology, the phenomenon in question begins 
to be unveiled in search of a more elaborate whole, 
whose understanding and interpretation guide us 
toward the meaning of this phenomenon, which is 
described in the discussion.
DISCUSSION
From the phenomenological reduction, the com-
prehensive and interpretative action of the phenom-
enon begins, which remains concealed and, therefore, 
demanding to be unveiled. Entering the hermeneutic 
circle requires the researcher’s attentive gaze, stripped 
of previous judgments and personal inferences. The 
phenomenon conceals and (un)conceals in the provoc-
ative action of allowing itself to be grasped.
Category I: Being-with the other in cardiac 
illness and finitude
For Heidegger(9), the analysis of Being involves the 
understanding of several constitutions, among them 
Being-in-the-world, which consists of the appropriate 
starting point for the analysis and interpretation of 
the ways of being of Being-there. The philosopher 
emphasizes that the expression Being-in-the-world 
must be understood as a unity, which cannot be dis-
solved. However, despite the non-dissolution, it has a 
multiplicity of structural moments, since to understand 
it, it is necessary to visualize three expressions: in-a-
world; entity and being-in(9).
In-a-world refers to the ontological structure of the 
world and the idea of   worldliness, that is, it is not only 
about geographic space, but an experiential world 
marked by historicity(9). The being-in-the-world, in the 
context of this study, is the Being-there who experiences 
the phenomenon of being a person with heart failure 
from a perspective of finitude. The world of the Being-
there is represented here by this phenomenon and its 
consequences, such as hospitalizations, limitations, 
proximity to death. The Being-there lives and shares 
these situations, shares this geographical, historical 
and experiential world.
It is perceived that, despite the cultural, religious and 
personal differences of each Being-there, the world is 
the same, since everyone experiences the same phe-
nomenon, so that the statements show us how close the 
Being-there establishes itself with other Beings-there, 
this is due to the sharing of the world of symptoms 
and limitations. 
In category I, it was observed that the Being-there 
is dissatisfaction due to not being able to carry out 
their daily activities independently, as they need help 
with tasks in which they were previously self-sufficient. 
Studies that seek to understand the experience of the 
Being with cardiac illness and who receives palliative 
care demonstrate that the limitation of carrying out daily 
activities significantly interferes with the quality of life of 
these individuals, since they long to resume their daily 
and work tasks, ensuring autonomy and self-care(14).
The statements lead to reflection on the limitations 
and interpersonal relationships of the Being-there, now 
dependent on help for basic daily activities. This help 
often comes from family members, but it can also come 
from people whom the Being-there does not even 
know, such as the healthcare team, companions of other 
patients and others who share the same phenomenon.
Heidegger(9) states that care is inherent to Being, is 
part of its identity structure and can alternate between 
modes; we can care through concern or occupation. 
Care as concern is shown when the patient receives care 
in a participatory, authentic way, when this manifests 
itself in the form of being-with-the-other. However, 
often, care as occupation becomes predominant, in 
which case the patient becomes the object of actions, 
treated as a tool or instrument, merely receiving med-
ications and procedures without truly participating in 
those actions.
According to the participants’ statements, some 
professionals do not talk to the patients, they just ‘de-
liver the medicines’. The Being-there is cared for in the 
mode of occupation, or rather, it is an instrument that 
the professional handles, a receptacle for their actions. 
It was also noted that the Being-there is distressed by 
needing care from people they have just met, after 
all, it is difficult to put oneself in the position of being 
cared for.
Communication permeates the care offered to the 
patient as a strategy to promote comfort. When it is 
not carried out effectively, feelings of fear and concern 
are evidenced due to the lack of knowledge about the 
current chronic condition and the type of assistance 
provided, resulting in a certain level of rejection and 
resistance(11). The study participants had no formal refer-
ral to the palliative care team, and they did not receive 
clear information about their prognosis. Kept within this 
conspiracy of silence, the anguish becomes acute, and 
the possibility of care and authentic living are limited.
Although discussions about death and finitude 
bring about feelings of fear, anguish and uncertainty, 
finitude and the process of dying are topics that need 
to be discussed between the patient, the family and 
the healthcare team through effective communication 
that ensures that all involved understand the phenom-
enon, establishing strategies that promote comfort(15).
The conspiracy of silence needs to be gradually 
dissolved; the team needs to be available, needs to 
communicate honestly and empathetically, to listen 
actively and strengthen the bond with both the patient 
and the family. Furthermore, referral to a palliative care 
team at the beginning of the illness process can help 
prevent the conspiracy of silence(16).
The limitations imposed by illness make the Being-
there face their fragility and the need to be cared for. 
This generates distress, but it can also be essential for 
the development of authentic relationships that sup-
port care; it is in the need for care that the Being-there 
perceives themselves as being-with-the-other.
From this perspective, the Being-there recognizes 
their own humanity and may have the opportunity 
to understand their existence as life and death. The 
Being-there needs to understand another way of being, 
because in addition to being-in-the-world, the Being-
there is not alone, they share this world.
The other Beings-there are those people who share 
the world and experiences with the Being-there and can 
be represented by other patients, family members, com-
panions and healthcare professionals. The relationship 
between the Beings-there can allow for approximation 
to the phenomenon; there are those who experience 
these relationships in a close and cooperative manner, 
and others in a more distant manner. Thus, one can-
not go through the phenomenon alone, because it is 
impossible to detach from the other Beings-there and 
from the experience of one’s own finitude.
The other Beings-there are related to the concept of 
social support, which refers to interpersonal exchanges 
that involve affection, affirmation and help. This relation-
ship focuses on recognizing the other and legitimizing 
their actions(11). Social and family support is crucial to 
improving patients’ quality of life, helping them to face 
their finitude with greater well-being, which helps 
to dispel the feeling of loneliness, promoting a more 
dignified and comfortable experience during palliative 
care, accompanying the person’s finitude trajectory(17).
The way of relating can follow different paths; some 
allow themselves to establish relationships and others 
remain impersonal. For Heidegger(9), the impersonal 
belongs to others; it is the neutral, it is the way of be-
ing that we all are in our daily lives. The Being-there, 
existing in an impersonal and caring way, often in the 
mode of occupation, is cast into idle talk or chatter. 
What is said in chatter drags with it increasingly wider 
circles, assuming an authoritarian character; things are 
the way they are, because that is how they are spoken 
about (impersonally).
The Being-there, surrounded by chatter, is unaware 
of their health condition and the implications of this 
condition for their existence; the chatter covers up the 
true meaning of the phenomenon of ‘being a person 
with HF’ from the perspective of finitude and, con-
sequently, continues impersonally passing through 
existence in an inauthentic way. 
It is noted that Being-there can remain in imperson-
ality, ignoring its prognosis instead of confronting the 
phenomenon presented. Being-there, whose life has 
always been immersed in impersonality, whose dreams 
and desires were never fulfilled, is the one who finds 
the most difficulty in embracing the phenomenon into 
which it was thrown, as it does not develop authentic 
relationships; they distance both from the phenomenon 
and from other Beings-there, living in the superficiality 
of relationships. However, by distancing from imper-
sonality, the Being-there can find possibilities in the 
shared world to establish authentic relationships with 
other patients, with companions, with their families 
and, mainly, with themselves. 
Para Heidegger(9) authenticity and inauthentici-
ty are ways of being of the Being-there, we can shift 
between the two modes and there is no value judg-
ment regarding this. Authenticity consists of breaking 
the barrier of the ontic and reaching the ontological, 
leaving the impersonal and taking responsibility for its 
existence; Those who remain in an inauthentic mode 
follow an ontic, unreflective existence, surrounded by 
concealed phenomena.
The Being of the person living with heart failure, 
in the perspective of finitude, can choose to live au-
thentically or inauthentically, and may also alternate 
between both. However, by experiencing the phe-
nomenon authentically, the Being-there comes closer 
to recognizing the being-toward-death, as described 
in the following category.
Category II: The construction of the being-
toward-death
The patients’ statements show their reactions and 
desires not only for death, but for the time they have 
still have to live. It was observed that the Being-there 
is distressed by the possibility of suffering, sometimes 
referring to the death of family members as quick, 
painless and without suffering as something desirable 
for themselves. The proximity of this end brings out 
spirituality. The discourses mention death, God, faith, 
reflections on flaws and virtues. Therefore, attention is 
drawn to the way in which these spiritual issues can 
be addressed with these people. 
The Being-there’s narrative is permeated by mem-
ories, by recollections of significant events, whether 
happy or sad. The Being-there seeks, in his memories, 
elements that help him experience the approaching 
phenomenon, because of this, death cannot be taken 
away from the other; each Being must, in their own 
time, assume their own death(9).
The personal and non-transferable nature of ending, 
as dying, awakens fear in the Being-there, as noted in 
the statements. There is an obscure ontological link 
between the phenomena of fear and anguish, but 
both are, most of the time, inseparable, being confused. 
Both phenomena are a withdrawal, but not every with-
drawal is an escape; one withdraws when something 
threatening is identified, that is, fear is triggered and 
that which one is afraid of is always an intramundane 
entity. Anguish is always an escape, an escape from 
oneself; what causes anguish is not an intramundane 
entity, but something undetermined, which in this 
case is death(9). 
The Being-there is frightened by the phenomenon 
of being a person with heart failure in the perspective 
of finitude from the beginning of the diagnosis, as 
heart disease is associated with severity, suffering and 
death. They speak about how frightening it is to know 
about the disease and how much they still hope to live 
and achieve things, however, this desire is faced with 
imminent finitude, which, although not mentioned, 
can be felt by the Being-there who experiences their 
functional decline every day.
The statements refer to God and faith as positive 
aspects, as they believe that only God knows the mo-
ment their existence will cease and driven by faith, 
they trust that this moment should be accepted and 
respected. The Being-there removes from themselves 
the responsibility of thinking about their own death, 
leaves the decision to God, and believes that God or a 
higher power, with all its wisdom, will decide for them. 
There are also reports of desires for the time they 
believe they have left, and statements about working 
less and seeking new experiences emerge. When armed 
with memories they are proud of and have experiences 
that were built based on their desires, the Being-there 
refers to finitude in a less anguished way. In other words, 
those who have had an authentic life show themselves 
open to the possibility of the final outcome. 
Following this thread, the Being-there declines and 
finds themselves thrown into a condition they did 
not choose, at least not consciously. Decay is nothing 
more than an existential mode of movement. Decay is 
a movement of existence itself. The Being-there, while 
decadent, has already fallen from itself as a factual be-
ing-in-the-world, the same world to which it belongs 
and had already been thrown(9).
The decay established in the experience of the 
Being-there with HF in the perspective of finitude, 
brings the possibility of constructing the being-for-
death, as this construction occurs in authentic living. 
When faced with the imminence of death, that is, the 
annihilation of its being, not only physical, but also 
historical and temporal, the Being-there finds itself 
faced with its (im)possibilities, the main one being 
the impossibility of accessing its Being in totality. With 
death, the Being-there reaches its biological end, but 
also its ontological-existential end.
In this scenario, the nurse emerges as a central figure 
in the construction of authentic care, with a fundamen-
tal role in the mediation between the Being with heart 
failure in the perspective of finitude and the knowledge 
necessary to fully experience this phenomenon. 
When a nurse tries to understand the world of an 
individual they care for and their family members, as 
well as their subjectivities, and effectively succeeds, 
the path is paved for the establishment of empathy 
between the professional, the patient and family. This 
enhances a relationship of mutual understanding, lead-
ing to a more effective detection of existing needs, 
a correct definition of priorities and interventions to 
be implemented(18).
The  nurse’s  role  must  transcend  physical  care,  
encompassing  the  patient’s  existential  dimension  
by providing information for the possibility of clear 
and accessible communication, the construction of 
spaces in which care is established in an authentic way. 
Furthermore, the nurse faces the challenge of breaking 
the impersonal and establishing a relationship that 
respects the singularity of the Being-there, fostering 
an authentic living that allows the patient to construct 
the being-toward-death consciously and with dignity.
The study contributes by clarifying the experience of 
these patients, which in turn can serve as a foundation 
for  interventions  aimed  at  improving  care  for  this  
population, whose needs are often neglected during 
the finitude process. One limitation of the study is 
the non-inclusion of patients in intensive care and 
emergency settings, which may significantly interfere 
with the experience described, since these settings have 
different dynamics from the hospital ward, requiring 
further research to include participants from these 
spaces.
FINAL CONSIDERATIONS
After unveiling the phenomenon, it is perceived 
that the Being with heart failure in the perspective of 
finitude goes through a process of construction of the 
being-toward-death, which is dynamic and continuous, 
conditioned by existence itself: I live, therefore I will die.
The Being-there is faced with numerous possibilities 
to experience finitude, being able to relate authentically 
with  other  Beings-there  and  with  their  process  of  
finitude,  thus  establishing  a  guiding  thread  that  
helps them understand and prepare for the outcome. 
However, inauthentic relationships and the established 
impersonal mode lead the Being toward a becoming 
that remains concealed by the other that surrounds 
them, in such a way that misinformation consolidates 
a distancing from the inevitable.
The  phenomenon  studied  is  marked  by  this  
lack of information about the severity of the illness 
and the proximity of death, which hinders patients’ 
communication about their essential needs and excludes 
the possibility of conscious choices, consolidating an 
inauthentic existence at the end of life.