ABSTRACT
Objectives: to identify whether the set of nursing diagnoses “Excessive fluid volume”, 
“Decreased cardiac output”, “Decreased activity tolerance”, “Fatigue” and “Impaired comfort” 
constitutes the “Deficient Cardiac Function Syndrome” in people with heart failure. Methods: 
a cross-sectional analytical study, which included 360 participants who were assessed by 
a cardiology nurse who used the nursing process and NANDA-International classification. 
Latent class analysis and log-linear models were used to determine the occurrence of 
nursing diagnoses by cluster. Results: “Fatigue” and “Excessive fluid volume” had the highest 
sensitivity; “Decreased cardiac output” and “Impaired comfort” had the highest specificity; 
“Decreased activity tolerance” had similar sensitivity and specificity. Latent class analysis 
for the new diagnosis included all diagnoses. Nine combinations of diagnostic statuses 
exhibited conditional dependence. Conclusions: the concomitant presence and strong 
relationship between diagnoses provide evidence for the existence of a syndromic diagnosis 
in this population.
Descriptors: Syndrome; Heart Failure; Nursing Diagnosis; Nursing Process; Standardized 
Nursing Terminology.
RESUMO
Objetivos: identificar se o conjunto de diagnósticos de enfermagem “Volume de líquido 
excessivo”, “Débito cardíaco diminuído”, “Tolerância à atividade diminuída”, “Fadiga” e “Conforto 
prejudicado” constitui a “Síndrome da Função Cardíaca Deficiente” em pessoas com insuficiência 
cardíaca. Métodos: estudo transversal analítico que incluiu 360 participantes que foram 
avaliados por enfermeira especialista em cardiologia que utilizou o processo de enfermagem 
e classificação da NANDA-Internacional. Análise de classes latentes e modelos log-lineares 
foram utilizados para determinar a ocorrência de diagnósticos de enfermagem por cluster. 
Resultados: “Fadiga” e “Volume de líquido excessivo” apresentaram maior sensibilidade, 
“Débito cardíaco diminuído” e “Conforto prejudicado” apresentaram maior especificidade. 
“Tolerância à atividade diminuída” apresentou sensibilidade e especificidade semelhantes. 
Análise de classe latente para o novo diagnóstico incluiu todos os diagnósticos. Nove 
combinações dos status dos diagnósticos exibiram dependência condicional. Conclusões: 
a presença concomitante e a forte relação entre os diagnósticos fornecem evidências da 
existência do diagnóstico sindrômico nessa população. 
Descritores: Síndrome; Insuficiência Cardíaca; Diagnóstico de Enfermagem; Processo de 
Enfermagem; Terminologia Padronizada em Enfermagem.
RESUMEN
Objetivos: identificar si el conjunto de diagnósticos de enfermería “Volumen excesivo de 
líquidos”, “Disminución del gasto cardíaco”, “Disminución de la tolerancia a la actividad”, 
“Fatiga” y “Alteración del confort” constituyen un “Síndrome de Función Cardíaca Deficiente” 
en personas con insuficiencia cardíaca. Métodos: estudio analítico transversal, que incluyó 
a 360 participantes quienes fueron evaluados por una enfermera especialista en cardiología 
que utilizó el proceso y clasificación de enfermería NANDA-Internacional. Se utilizaron análisis 
de clases latentes y modelos log-lineales para determinar la ocurrencia de diagnósticos de 
enfermería por cluster. Resultados: “Fatiga” y “Volumen excesivo de líquido” mostraron 
mayor sensibilidad; “Disminución del gasto cardíaco” y “Confort deteriorado” mostraron 
mayor especificidad; “tolerancia a la actividad disminuida” mostró una sensibilidad y 
especificidad similares. El análisis de clases latentes para el nuevo diagnóstico incluyó todos 
los diagnósticos. Nueve combinaciones de estados diagnósticos exhibieron dependencia 
condicional. Conclusiones: la presencia concomitante y la fuerte relación entre los diagnósticos 
evidencian la existencia del diagnóstico sindrómico en esta población.
Descriptores: Síndrome; Insuficiencia Cardíaca; Diagnóstico de Enfermería; Proceso de 
Enfermería; Terminología Normalizada de Enfermería.
INTRODUCTION
Heart failure (HF) is a highly prevalent and debilitating health 
condition(1) that involves complex pathological processes that af-
fect multiple dimensions of a person’s life(2). As a result, individuals 
with HF experience multiple human responses simultaneously(3), 
represented by clusters of nursing diagnoses (NDs). These clusters 
are characterized as a syndrome if they comprise at least two 
NANDA-International (NANDA-I)-approved diagnoses and the 
same interventions are used to treat them(4).
According to a literature review, people with HF often expe-
rience several NDs simultaneously, which are often diagnosed 
together by nurses in clinical practice, and for this reason, they 
were selected to compose the syndromic diagnosis of this study. 
These NDs include “Fatigue” (FA), “Excessive fluid volume” (EFV), 
“Decreased activity tolerance” (DAT) and “Decreased cardiac output” 
(DCO)(5). The expanded understanding of the term “syndrome” 
as a multidimensional condition influenced the inclusion of the 
“Impaired comfort” (IC) ND, with the purpose of meeting the 
desire to compose a ND that identified compromised emotional 
and social elements, in addition to physical elements.
EFV is included in domain 2 (nutrition) and class 5 (hydration); 
DCO, DAT and FA are included in domain 4 (activity/rest), the 
first two diagnoses being in class 4 (cardiovascular/pulmonary 
responses), and the third in class 3 (energy balance). Finally, IC is 
included in domain 12 (comfort) and class 1 (physical comfort). 
The occurrence of these NDs as a cluster is believed to be the 
result of a common pathophysiological process (poor cardiac 
function) that can be addressed with similar interventions. Thus, 
altered cardiac muscle function result in the activation of adaptive 
responses that trigger poor tissue perfusion(1) (correlated with 
DCO) and volume overload(1) (correlated with EFV). Furthermore, 
hypoperfusion culminates in the sustained perception of insuf-
ficient energy to perform daily activities(1) (correlated with DAT) 
and a disabling sensation of physical and mental exhaustion(1) 
(correlated with FA). In addition to physical discomfort, negative 
feelings arise from frequent hospitalizations, dependence on 
caregivers, and interruption of work activities(6) (correlated with 
HF). Still, none of the NDs of syndrome approved in the classifica-
tion (2018-2020)(4), current edition, at the time of the beginning 
of the study, seemed adequate to accurately document the hu-
man responses presented by people with decompensated HF.
Therefore, the “Deficient Cardiac Function Syndrome” ND 
was developed based on scientific literature in health and the 
clinical experience of the authors of this study. It was defined 
as “physical, emotional, psychosocial, and spiritual distress due 
to a decrease in the heart’s ability to pump blood to the body 
and to the adaptive responses to the insulted heart muscle”. The 
defining characteristics (DCs) of the syndromic ND are FA, EFV, 
DAT, IC, and DCO. The related factor comprises structural and/or 
functional cardiac dysfunction.
OBJECTIVES
To identify whether the set of NDs FA, EFV, DAT, IC and DCO 
constitutes the “Deficient Cardiac Function Syndrome” in people 
with HF.
METHODS
Ethical aspects 
This study was conducted in accordance with ethical principles 
and was approved by the Research Ethics Committee. The Informed 
Consent Form (ICF) was obtained from all individuals involved in 
writing, and data confidentiality was ensured(7).
Study design, period and place
This is an analytical cross-sectional study that followed the 
STrengthening the Reporting of OBservational studies in Epidemi-
ology guidelines(8). Data collection was carried out between April 
2019 and May 2022, in a public emergency room (ER) specialized 
in cardiovascular conditions, in São Paulo, Brazil. 
Population or sample; inclusion and exclusion criteria 
Sample size was established considering the latent class 
analysis (LCA) technique for inference of each ND individually(9). 
DCO was selected to define sample size, as it has the largest 
number of DC (n=36)(4). A proportion of ten participants per DC 
determined a sample size at 360.
Participants with a medical diagnosis of decompensated HF, 
aged 18 years or older, admitted to the ER for no more than six 
hours, and with New York Heart Association functional classes 
(FCs) III and IV(10) were included. Participants with reduced level 
of consciousness and/or confusion, hemodynamic instability, and 
those who required tracheal intubation during data collection 
were excluded.
Study protocol
All individuals admitted to the ER with decompensated HF 
who met the eligibility criteria were invited to participate in the 
study and signed the ICF.
Sociodemographic (age, sex, race, marital status, religion, 
education, and occupation) and clinical data (previous and cur-
rent health history, medications, and test results) were collected 
through in-person interviews by the principal investigator (PI), 
followed by a physical examination and medical record review. 
Furthermore, the validated Brazilian versions of the Dutch Fatigue 
Scale (DUFS) and the Dutch Exertion Fatigue Scale (DEFS)(11) were 
used to assess NDs FA due to their abstract nature. These tools 
contain eight and nine items, respectively. Each item is followed by 
a 5-point Likert scale. The total score for each scale is given by the 
sum of the scores for each item. The total DUFS and DEFS scores 
were used to determine the presence of FA. The presence of FA 
was diagnosed when the total DUFS scores were greater than or 
equal to 14.5, and the presence of exertional FA was diagnosed 
when the total DEFS scores were greater than or equal to 12.5(12).
To determine the presence of other NDs, the PI used her clini-
cal expertise and the NANDA-I 2018-2020 classification (current 
at the time of data collection). These supported clinical judg-
ment that culminated in the clinical decision-making about the 
presence of NDs. The data collection instruments for each ND
studied considered all DCs and other elements such as definition, 
associated factors, associated conditions and populations at risk, 
as appropriate. Finally, to determine the presence of “Deficient 
Heart Function Syndrome” for this study, at least two NDs had to 
be diagnosed. Data collection lasted an average of 30 minutes. 
Patients were assessed by the PI at a single time point within the 
first six hours of admission to the ND due to expected changes 
in clinical status secondary to HF treatment.
Data collection was carried out only by the PI due to challenges 
related to the availability of professionals to collect information 
at the time the study was carried out, which coincided with the 
pandemic period. 
Data and statistics analysis
Descriptive statistics were used to describe the variables. 
For the proportions of categorical variables, 95% Confidence 
Intervals were calculated. 
In order to identify a representative structure for each syn-
drome ND component, five models based on LCA with random 
effects were adjusted. LCA is an analytical technique used to 
calculate accuracy measures of clinical indicators when there is 
no perfect reference standard, considering the hypothesis that 
an unobserved or latent variable (ND) indicates the associations 
between observable variables (clinical indicators)(9).
Each model was based on two latent classes to represent 
the presence or absence of each ND under study. Each model 
was considered adjusted when all the characteristics included 
presented at least one accuracy measure (sensitivity or specific-
ity) with values greater than 50%, based on the lower range 
of their confidence interval. Then, for each adjusted model, 
the posterior probabilities of latent classes were calculated in 
order to represent the diagnostic inference to be used to define 
each participant’s status in relation to the presence/absence of 
each of the five diagnoses. After this inference, a new LCA was 
adjusted based on the distribution of the five diagnoses, and 
measures of diagnostic accuracy were obtained, which were 
interpreted in relation to the probability of expression of “Defi-
cient Heart Function Syndrome”. Subsequent probabilities were 
also calculated to identify the different forms of expression of 
this syndrome among individuals assessed. For each individual 
diagnosis and for the syndrome, estimates of its prevalence are 
also presented. Finally, to analyze the simultaneous occurrence 
of NDs and characterize this group of diagnoses as a syndrome, 
log-linear models were adjusted for all possible combinations 
of occurrence of the five diagnoses. The model coefficients with 
their respective confidence intervals are presented and represent 
the magnitude of conditional dependence whenever their values 
are positive. Moreover, a Z-test was calculated to test the null 
hypothesis of conditional independence. A significance level of 
5% was adopted for this analysis.
RESULTS
A total of 360 individuals admitted to the ER with decompen-
sated HF were assessed. The majority were male (n=219; 60.8%), 
aged between 61 and 70 years (n=102; 28.3%), white (n=213; 
60.3%), retired (n=167; 46.4%) and with an average of 7.51 years 
of education. The majority of participants were classified as IV 
FC (n=187=51.9%), with hemodynamic profile B (n=229; 63.6%), 
reduced ejection fraction (n=257; 71.4%) and biventricular dysfunc-
tion (n=187; 51.9%). The most prevalent etiology was ischemic 
(n=112; 31.1%), and the major precipitants of decompensation 
were inadequate diet (n=126; 35%), non-adherence to medica-
tion (n=102; 28.3%) and infections (n=98; 26.4%).
FA was diagnosed in 84.17% of the sample. Seven of the 16 
DCs had sensitivity and specificity greater than 80% (Table 1). 
The posterior probabilities for the presence of FA were strongly 
influenced by the simultaneous occurrence of the seven DCs 
that had high sensitivity and specificity. 
EFV was diagnosed in 80.24% of the sample. All of its DCs, 
except “Increased central venous pressure”, were identified and 
presented sensitivity and specificity measures higher than 50%. 
Of this set, eight DCs showed high sensitivity (>80%); 15 showed 
high specificity (>70%); and three showed similar sensitivity and 
specificity (>70%) (Table 1). The DCs with the highest sensitivity 
were present in almost all combinations that demonstrated a 
higher probability for the presence of diagnosis.
The prevalence of DAT was 54.16%. All of its DCs were identified 
in the sample. However, two of them (“Exertional discomfort” and 
“Exertional dyspnea”) were identified in all participants and did 
not compose the final LCA. Of the remaining five, three showed 
high sensitivity (>70%); one showed high specificity (100%); 
and another presented high values   for both sensitivity and 
specificity (>70%) (Table 1). The posterior probabilities showed 
the importance of the “Abnormal heart rate response to activity” 
DC, as it comprises all the combinations that point to a greater 
probability of this diagnosis occurring. 
The estimated prevalence of IC was 44.71%. Nine DCs showed 
high specificity (>90%). On the other hand, four DCs showed high 
sensitivity (>80%), and three DCs showed high values   of both 
sensitivity and specificity (>90%) (Table 1). All sets consisted of at 
least two DCs with high sensitivity and one with high specificity.
The prevalence of DCO was 37.22%. The low prevalence was 
due to the absence of DCs of this ND in the sample. Unlike the 
other NDs, 11 DCs were not identified in the sample, and the 
remaining 25 had higher specificity. Furthermore, 14 DCs also 
had sensitivity greater than 50%; eight had sensitivity greater 
than 80%; and two had sensitivity greater than 90% (Table 1). 
LCA revealed a large number of different combinations of several 
DCs occurring concomitantly.
Table 1 presents the diagnostic accuracy measures of the DCs 
of the studied NDs.
After using the posterior probabilities of each ND to determine 
the presence or absence of each ND, the syndrome’s LCA included 
the five diagnoses. Table 2 presents the accuracy measures of the 
“Deficient Heart Function Syndrome” DC and its prevalence. In this 
model, EFV and FA had the highest sensitivity values, while DCO 
and IC had the highest specificity. Both sensitivity and specificity 
for DAT were approximately 70%.
Table 3 shows the posterior probabilities for the occurrence 
of “Deficient Heart Function Syndrome”.
In Table 3, the sets represent the different combinations (pres-
ent/absent) of each ND (in the case of the syndrome, DCs would 
be the five NDs investigated). These sets were obtained directly 
from the sample, and their frequency is described in the “n” col-
umn. A total of 31 different combinations were identified. In the 
table, only the combinations in which the syndrome presence 
probability was greater than 0.5 were shown. Furthermore, the
posterior probabilities suggest a strong influence of IC, since this 
ND was present in almost all sets that demonstrated a higher prob-
ability of the syndrome occurring. Most of participants identified 
with the syndrome presented three or more NDs concomitantly.
Table 4 presents the log-linear models that represent the 
combinations of the five diagnoses that exhibited conditional 
dependence relationships between them.
As shown in Table 4, nine combinations of the five NDs showed 
conditional dependence. The concomitant presence of the five 
NDs indicates a strong relationship between them.
DISCUSSION
This is the first study to examine whether FA, EFV, DAT, IC, and 
DCO constitute “Deficient Heart Function Syndrome”.
In line with our findings, FA was highly prevalent in HF in an-
other investigation(5). This is consistent with the pathophysiological 
mechanisms of HF of water retention and poor tissue perfusion, 
which results in a sustained perception of tiredness and inability 
to perform usual physical and mental activities. However, due to 
the subjective nature of this ND, its identification requires specific 
training, in addition to the use of reliable assessment methods(13). 
EFV was present in 80.24% of participants. The DCs with the 
highest sensitivity portray classic manifestations presented by 
people with decompensated HF(14,15). This myriad of signs and 
symptoms reflects volume overload(1). In fact, this ND is frequently 
documented in the presence of congestive symptoms(16), and is 
related to the risk of clinical worsening(17).
The prevalence of IC was 44.71% in our study, which contrasts 
with a prevalence of 86% found in a retrospective study of 144 
medical records of older adults with HF(18). This difference may be 
due to the time period in which data were collected from partici-
pants. Meanwhile, in our study, we included participants who had 
been admitted to the ND for no more than six hours, and in the 
aforementioned study, the researchers took into account the entire 
length of hospital stay. Physical comfort is affected in people with 
decompensated HF due to the worsening of clinical manifestations 
that negatively impact daily activities and quality of life(6).
The prevalence of DAT was 54.16% in our sample. The literature 
is prolific in demonstrating that this ND is common in people with 
decompensated HF(5,13). Three DCs of DAT that were considered 
highly sensitive in this study were critical in providing clinical 
evidence to support this ND in a previous study(19). Among these 
DCs, “Abnormal heart rate response to activity” appears to be of 
particular relevance and is attributed to DCO(20).
DCO had the lowest prevalence among the five NDs. Regarding 
the DCs with the highest sensitivity, a Brazilian survey of people with 
HF identified five DCs for this diagnosis, supporting the findings 
of this study(13). The DCs with the highest specificity suggest the
critical and priority nature of this diagnosis for this population(14). 
However, DCO was not identified in most participants in this in-
vestigation due to the phenotypic variation of decompensated HF, 
since some participants did not present signs of poor perfusion, a 
vital element for the typification of this diagnosis(15). Similar to our 
findings, other authors identified DCO in 16% of their sample(18). 
In another recent study, four new related factors were found for 
DCO, supporting its relevance in clinical practice(21).
This study provides evidence that the five NDs (FA, EFV, DAT, 
IC, and DCO) occur simultaneously, suggesting that together they 
constitute “Deficient Heart Function Syndrome”. This evidence is 
supported by the strong relationship between the NDs and their 
conditional dependence. In fact, HF presents a multifaceted and 
cascading behavior, portraying the influence of one event on the 
appearance of another(22). Likewise, an affected human response 
influences the expression of other human responses, which may 
signal the relevance of a syndrome diagnosis.
The estimated prevalence of “Deficient Heart Function Syn-
drome” was 61.49%. EFV and FA had the highest sensitivity, 
which refers to the ability of these NDs to identify individuals 
with the syndrome. Since they are highly sensitive NDs, only a 
few individuals diagnosed with the syndrome will be missed and 
the number of false negative results is low(23). In turn, DCO and IC 
had the highest specificity. This means that if these NDs are not 
identified, it is likely that individuals do not have the syndrome 
ND. Since DCO and IC are highly specific, when identified, there 
will be few false-positive cases of the syndrome. 
It is worth mentioning that the NANDA-I(24) 2024-2026 edition 
excluded DCO and IC from its structure, but even so, these NDs 
have been the most frequently used by nurses(5), having been 
observed, through this study, a significant prevalence of each of 
them based on clinical evidence and their occurrence together 
in the clinical context in which it was applied. 
Study limitations
The generalizability of our findings is subject to certain limita-
tions, and cannot be extrapolated to all patients with HF, since the 
syndrome ND was investigated only in people with decompensated 
HF and in a single highly specialized center. Furthermore, the fact 
that assessments were performed exclusively by the PI, without 
validity by other specialists, may be a bias, despite the PI’s efforts 
to accurately document clinical findings and decision-making. 
Furthermore, data collection occurred during the pandemic, 
which may have influenced the findings on FA. Finally, elements 
from the previous edition of NANDA-I (2018-2020), a publication 
valid at the time the study was conducted, were considered. 
Contributions to nursing
For the first time in the literature, it has been demonstrated 
that FA, EFV, DAT, HF, and DCO can constitute the “Deficient 
Heart Function Syndrome” ND. Addressing human responses as 
a syndrome has several advantages: the syndrome may more 
accurately represent the human response to HF; managing a 
syndrome ND may be more cost-effective than addressing each 
ND separately; and a syndrome ND will facilitate appropriate 
nursing documentation. Regarding research, future studies 
should investigate clinical validity of “Deficient Heart Function 
Syndrome” in other groups of people. In addition, studies to 
map nursing-sensitive outcomes for this ND and intervention 
tests should be performed. Finally, this study made it possible 
to identify that the NDs that constitute the syndromic diagnosis 
are identified in clinical practice, adding evidence of the need 
for new investigations that support the new inclusion of NDs 
removed from the current edition of NANDA-I.
CONCLUSIONS
The simultaneous occurrence of FA, EFV, DAT, IC and DCO 
indicates a strong relationship between them, providing strong 
evidence of a syndrome ND in people with decompensated HF. 
Furthermore, the occurrence of these NDs in clusters as an un-
folding of common causal factors can be addressed with similar 
nursing interventions.