AbstractBackground: The financial burden faced by patients with advanced heart failure (HF) who are ineligible for heart transplantation or lack have access to advanced therapy with left ventricular assist devices (LVADs) has not been described in Latin American.Objective: To conduct a microcosting study in patients who were otherwise eligible for LVAD therapy who did not have access to it.Methods: We evaluated the direct costs of care in a cohort of advanced HF patients treated at a Brazilian public hospital who were candidates for LVAD therapy (and ineligible for transplantation) but lacked access to the procedure. A patient-level cost analysis was performed from the time LVAD need was identified until death or end of follow-up. The total cost per patient was calculated using the time-driven activity-based costing methodology and expressed in international dollars (Int$). Patients were stratified by disease severity and all-cause mortality to assess cost variability.Results:    Twenty  consecutive  patients  (mean  age  51  years;  90%  male)  were  followed  for  an  average  of  15  months,  with an overall survival rate of 40%. The average cost per patient was Int$120,457 (SD Int$78,029). Hospitalizations represented  the  largest  share  of  total  costs,  accounting  for  72%  (Figure  2).  Patients  with  greater  clinical  severity  
(INTERMACS profile ≤ 3) incurred significantly higher costs (Int$156,457), nearly 70% more than those who did not require inotropic support (Int$91,003).
Conclusions: This study highlights the financial burden associated with ongoing medical management of advanced HF in patients who would otherwise be eligible for LVAD therapy. These findings provide a basis for evaluating the cost-effectiveness of device-based, life-saving interventions in selected advanced HF populations.Keywords: Costs and Cost Analysis; Heart Failure; Latin America.
Introduction
Advanced  heart  failure  (HF),  a  stage  of  disease  marked  by  resistance  to  traditional  pharmacological  and  non-pharmacological therapies, is associated with high morbidity and  mortality,  as  well  as  increased  healthcare  resource  utilization  and  costs  for  both  individuals  and  society.1  As  populations age and benefit from improved therapies for early 
1
onset cardiovascular disease, the prevalence of advanced HF continues to rise, leading to a substantial societal burden and loss of productivity.2  While heart transplantation is now an established therapy for  advanced  HF,  a  substantial  number  of  individuals  are  ineligible  due  to  comorbidity  or  other  reasons.3  For  these  patients,  a  durable  left  ventricular  assist  device  (LVAD)  serves as a life-prolonging therapy; otherwise, they are often relegated  to  palliative  care.4  In  the  United  States,  27,298  long-term LVADs were implanted between 2010 and 2019; in 2019 alone, the number of LVAD implants nearly matched the number of heart transplants performed nationwide, with the  majority  of  cases  classified  as  destination  therapy  for  patients  deemed  ineligible  for  transplantation.5,6  In  Europe,  approximately 500 individuals per year have received an LVAD over the last 10 years, and this number is steadily growing, due to the limited availability of donor organs.7 
The  outcomes  for  patients  with  long-term  DAVE  have  improved  substantially  over  time,  largely  due  to  better  patient selection, enhanced clinical management, and the introduction of the fully magnetically levitated HeartMate 3 pump (Abbott, USA). Median survival now exceeds five years, particularly among patients who are otherwise ineligible for transplantation.8-10 However, LVADs are not available in most low- and middle-income countries due to concerns of cost-effectiveness. In Brazil, the HeartMate 3 LVAD is accessible only  through  private  insurance  or  philanthropic  research  initiatives.11 The cost of care for patients with advanced HF who  are  unable  to  receive  LVAD  therapy  remains  largely  unknown, despite its potential relevance for evaluating the cost-effectiveness of such interventions.  Healthcare resource utilization and the cost of care for patients  with  advanced  HF  who  are  treated  without  the  possibility of salvage through LVAD or transplantation may represent a financial burden that is not readily recognized by individuals, healthcare systems, payors and governments. In selected cases, the judicious use of destination LVAD therapy may  prove  to  be  cost-effective.11,12  Therefore,  the  present  study,  conducted  within  the  Brazilian  public  healthcare  system,  aims  to  evaluate  the  longitudinal  costs  of  medical  management  of  advanced  HF  in  patients  who  might  have 
been eligible for destination LVAD therapy but lacked access to the procedure.
Methods
We conducted a microcosting study (a financial estimation method that includes resource use and unit cost) to evaluate direct  costs of a  cohort of patients  with advanced HF  from  the perspective of a public university hospital, in a regional reference  center  for  advanced  HF  therapies.  The  sample  consisted of patients with advanced HF who were ineligible to undergo a heart transplant but were eligible to receive an LVAD as an indication for destination therapy.13
Population
We  defined  a  cohort  of  consecutive  adult  patients  with  advanced-stage  HF  who  met  eligibility  criteria  for  LVAD  implantation  as  destination  therapy  but  were  unable  to  receive  such  treatment  at  our  institution  between  January  2015,  and  May  2023.  Advanced  HF  was  defined  through  clinical evaluation, incorporating symptom burden, objective prognostic  parameters  and  therapeutic  interventions  (such  as  inotropic  therapy),  as  outlined  by  European  and  North-American  cardiology  societies  and  summarized  by  Truby  
and Rogers.14 Exclusion criteria included those patients who underwent a heart transplant or a LVAD implantation, those with private insurance coverage, and those primarily followed at other institutions. The  clinical  reasons  for  transplantation  ineligibility  were  advanced  age,  severe  pulmonary  hypertension,  obesity,  active smoking, frailty and other comorbidities. Our program adheres  to  the  guidelines  of  the  International  Society  for  Heart and Lung Transplantation regarding contraindications for transplantation.15,16 Severe pulmonary hypertension was defined as pulmonary vascular resistance greater than 3 Wood units, not responsive to vasodilatory challenge. The flowchart of patients eligible for long-term LVAD therapy and selected for inclusion in the cost analysis is in Figure 1.The data collection period for each patient began when the clinical team considered an indication for advanced therapy – either heart transplantation or LVAD – or at hospital admission for those already hospitalized on that date. The cost acquisition interval was censored at death, at the end of study follow-up on  June  30,  2023  or  at  discharge  for  patients  hospitalized  on  that  date.  Data  sources  included  electronic  discharge  summaries,  progress  notes,  outpatient  clinic  records,  and  heart transplant/DAVE assessment forms. Individual patient-level cost analysis included all hospital encounters, including clinic visits, diagnostic tests, procedures, and hospitalizations.  
Cost data
Cost  components  for  THE  overall  cost  analysis  were  obtained  using  the  time-driven  activity-based  costing  (TDABC) methodology.17 In this approach, in which, resource consumption  is  measured  based  on  the  patient  care  cycle,  considering  both  the  unit  cost  of  delivering  care  and  the  time  required  to  perform  each  transaction  or  activity.  Cost  data  related  to  personnel,  infrastructure,  procedures,  and  diagnostic  tests  (including  imaging)  were  extracted  from  hospital  administrative  records,  following  the  methodology  used in previous studies focused on specific procedures and services provided to patients with advanced HF (Table 1). Medication  costs  were  derived  from  patient-level  consumption  data  obtained  through  the  institutional  administrative  system.  Procedural  costs  included  materials,  professional  fees,  and  infrastructure.  Interviews  were  performed to estimate the average time healthcare professionals dedicated to each procedure, consultation, outpatient clinic visit, and day-hospital care. Costs for individual hospital units –  such  as  inpatient  wards,  intensive  care  units  (ICUs),  and  catheterization  laboratory  –  covered  depreciation,  energy,  administrative  supplies,  professional  salaries,  and  other  expenses. For professional salaries, the exact staffing allocation for each unit was calculated, including the ICU area specifically designated  for  cardiology  patients,  which  has  a  different  staffing structure. The average monthly direct fixed cost for each unit was computed and divided by the unit’s monthly service capacity. For example, for the ICU, the capacity was determined based on the number of available beds: 45 beds operating 24 hours a day, 30 days, totaling 32,400 hours. The average  daily  cost  was  calculated  by  dividing  the  total  cost  attributed to the unit by the number of beds and working days.
Hospitalization costs were then determined by multiplying the time each patient spent in a given unit by the corresponding cost per unit of time.Cost  components  were  calculated  and  aggregated  to  determine the total cost per patient. Descriptive cost analyses included  mean,  standard  deviation  (SD),  median,  and  interquartile range. Patients were stratified by clinical variables –  specifically,  disease  severity  as  classified  by  INTERMACS  (Interagency  Registry  for  Mechanically  Assisted  Circulatory  Support)  profiles  –  and  by  mortality  outcome  of  death  was  performed  to  estimate  cost  variability.  Also,  an  estimated  annual  cost  per  patient  was  calculated  to  represent  the  expected annual economic burden of patients with this clinical condition  to  the  providers.  As  the  study  cohort  included  patients with varying follow-up durations, the total cost per patient was divided by the number of months of follow-up and then multiplied by 12. This adjustment is important to consider when applying the data to future economic models. All values were adjusted to the year 2023 using the Brazilian Broad National Consumer Price Index accumulated from the time the data was originally obtained (for costs extracted from scientific articles). These values are presented in international dollars  (Int$)  to  reflect  purchasing  power  parity,  based  on  the  World  Bank  conversion  factor  available  at  https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/PA.NUS.PPP  (accessed  on  March  29,  2024).  For  reference,  Int$  1,000  is  equivalent  to  US$  1,000 and R$ 2,580. Comparisons between INTERMACS > 3 
and INTERMACS ≤ 3 profiles, as well as between outcomes 
(alive  vs.  deceased)  were  performed  using  Student’s  t  test.  All analyses were performed using Microsoft® Excel for Mac. 
Ethical Aspects 
The research  protocol was approved  by the  Institutional  Research  and  Ethics  Committee,  and  informed  consent  was  waived  due  to  the  retrospective  nature  of  the  study.  All researchers signed a confidentiality agreement to access individual data. The study was conducted independently and with full autonomy by the authors, without any interference from the sponsor. 
Results
The  inclusion  and  exclusion  criteria  were  met  in  20  consecutive patients with advanced HF.  Their mean age was 51 years, and 90% were male. Table 2 shows demographic and clinical characteristics of the study cohort. Three-quarter of patients were hospitalized at the time of inclusion and nearly 
half of them were in INTERMACS status ≤ 3 [these represent 
grades of stability on inotropic therapy from the least (1) to most (3) stable] when a destination LVAD was considered but could not be implanted. At the time of study inclusion, the proportion of guideline directed medical therapy for HF was relatively  low  (largely  due  to  tolerability).  SGLT2  inhibitors  were not readily accessible in Brazil for HF treatment before 2022, hence use rates were low, however, utility in advanced HF  remains  uncertain  as  such  patients  were  generally  not  included in the pivotal trials.18 The  main  contraindication  to  ineligibility  for  heart  transplantation  was  pulmonary  hypertension,  followed  by  
3
comorbidities. Overall survival was 40% at the end of a median of 15 months (min 4, max 36) of follow-up; eleven patients died due to progressive pump failure, and one from sudden death. Individual patients’ clinical severity characteristics and resource utilization information are described in Table 3.
Cost analysis
The average cost per patient was Int  $ 120,457 (SD 78,029), which represents a mean monthly cost of Int$ 8,030. Table 4 describes the cost composition per patient included in the study, and Figure 2, the cost composition proportion. Patients spent 31 (SD 30) days in ICUs and 53 (SD 47) days in non-ICU units between the date of LVAD indication and the end of the study follow-up. Indeed, hospitalizations represented more than two-thirds of the total cost (56% in intensive care, and 16% in non-ICU care). Medications exclusively dispensed in-hospital accounted for 3% of the average overall cost.    The  most  frequent  cardiac  procedure  among  studied  patients was right heart catheterization (RHC) (18 patients), with an average cost of Int$ 2,045 (SD 1,921). Other invasive and non-invasive cardiac procedures included hemodialysis, blood  products,  endomyocardial  biopsies,  implantable  cardioverter  defibrillator  and/or  cardiac  resynchronization
therapy  insertion,  transcatheter  edge-to-edge  mitral  valve  repair,  peripherally  inserted  central  catheter  insertion,  coronary  angioplasty,  external  electrical  cardioversion  and  intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) implantation. None of the study patients received a temporary mechanical circulatory support device other than IABP since they were not transplant-eligible, and bridging to a LVAD was not possible.Overall,  patients  with  advanced  HF  demonstrated  high  health care resource utilization and cost variability, with more patients registering a total cost higher than the percentile 75 of the total sample, and less patients with cost values lower than  the  percentile  25.  Figures  3A  and  3B  illustrate  the  individual  variability  of  total  costs  and  the  individual  total  of days hospitalized in the ward or in an ICU. Patients spent around 30% of the study period hospitalized (range 0-100%). The  small  sample  size  did  not  allow  statistical  comparisons  among patients with distinct resource consumption patterns. Average total costs per patient were further analyzed based 
on the INTERMACS profile (INTERMACS ≤ 3 vs. > 3) at the 
time of LVAD indication, continuing through to either death or study completion during the follow-up period (Figure 4). 
Overall, patients in poorer clinical condition (INTERMACS ≤ 3) incurred costs nearly 70% higher than those in better status
(p = 0.036). Meanwhile, patients who died during follow-up had similar total costs compared to those who survived until  the  end  of  the  study  (p=  0.399).  Higher  expenses  with  hospitalizations,  procedures,  and  tests  largely  drove  the  cost  variability  between  groups  of  INTERMACS  status.  The  mortality  was  equivalent,  as  six  patients  died  in  each  of the two INTERMACS groups. Patients with INTERMACS 
≤ 3 spent an average of 112 (SD 53) days in the hospital, 
while those with INTERMACS > 3 spent an average of 62 (SD 52) days. 
Discussion
This study reports the direct medical costs encountered among patients with advanced HF who are unable to receive advanced therapies (heart transplantation or LVAD) within the Brazilian public health system context. Among severely ill  patients  with  high  mortality  the  average  treatment  cost  was high, reaching Int$ 120,457 in a 15-month follow-up period. The Central Illustration summarizes the main findings.Cost  of  care  analyses  in  medically  managed  advanced  HF patients who are not eligible for life-prolonging therapy
remain  limited.  Russo  et  al.,19  in  2008,  evaluated  the  medical  management  arm  of  the  Randomized  Evaluation  of  Mechanical  Assistance  for  the  Treatment  of  Congestive  HF  trial,  and  found  that  the  average  cost  of  care  during  the  final  two  years  of  life  was  USD$156,169,  with  50.5%  (USD$78,880.39)  incurred  in  the  last  six  months.19  Our  contemporary data confirms that medical management for this  vulnerable  patient  population  continues  to  be  costly,  particularly  among  those  with  greater  clinical  severity  at  the time LVAD therapy is considered. Healthcare costs and resource utilization escalate in patients who die, despite their shorter lifespan. This suggests that one potential strategy to reduce  costs  may  involve  earlier  identification  of  patients  with  a  markedly  declining  clinical  trajectory.  The  lack  of  timely referral for advanced therapies remains a challenge, but as our cost analysis indicates, it may represent a critical opportunity for intervention.10,20 The observed costs associated with advanced HF differ 
substantially from those incurred by patients with chronic, stable  HF.  A  previous  study  employing  microcosting  techniques  to  assess  ambulatory  expenses  found  that  the
annual  cost  for  patients  in  New  York  Heart  Association  (NYHA) functional class I was Int  $ 510, whereas those in NYHA  class  III/IV  accounted  for  Int   $  1334  per  year.21  As  expected,  patients  with  more  severe  disease  were  more  resource-intensive, with up to 74% of their costs attributed to diagnostic tests and procedures. These findings further support  the  need  for  earlier  identification  of  high-risk  patients  and  suggest  that  greater  attention  to  the  cost-effectiveness  of  advanced  therapies  may  be  warranted.  Such  insights  could  inform  more  efficient  healthcare  resource  allocation  policies,  particularly  within  publicly  funded systems. In addition to the direct costs related to the treatment of advanced HF, indirect costs are also relevant but remain poorly quantified in most scenarios. The literature suggests that indirect costs may account for up to 40% of the total cost of disease management.22,23 Since our study assessed only  direct  healthcare  costs,  including  medications,  we  should  be  cautious  when  interpreting  the  present  data.  Nonetheless,  it  is  likely  that  our  estimates  underestimate  the  actual  societal  burden.  Comprehensive  evaluations  of  the  economic  impact  of  HF  on  the  healthcare  system  should  consider  factors  such  as  loss  of  productivity  for  patients  and/or  family  members,  the  need  for  caregivers,  medication  acquisition,  and  transportation  for  frequent  visits to healthcare facilities for consultations and diagnostic tests.  Unfortunately,  indirect  costs  are  inadequately  captured  by  current  Brazilian  electronic  health  systems  and administrative databases. Therefore, our findings likely underrepresent the total cost associated with the medical management of advanced HF.
Our findings highlight the importance of conducting cost-effectiveness studies for treatment options aimed at salvaging patients with advanced HF. Previous studies evaluating LVADs suggested  unfavorable  cost-effectiveness;  however,  these  analyses  are  now  outdated,  as  they  were  based  on  legacy  systems.24  With  advancements  in  LVAD  technology  and  improvements  in  medical  management,  there  has  been  a  notable reduction in hospitalizations and overall healthcare resource utilization.25,26A  recent  analysis  conducted  in  the  United  Kingdom  using the contemporary HeartMate 3 LVAD for destination therapy  demonstrated  cost-effectiveness  thresholds  that  are  meaningful  for  public  payers.  This  study  reported  an  incremental  cost-effectiveness  ratio  (ICER)  of  £47,361  per  quality-adjusted  life  year  (QALY)  gained  compared  to  optimal  medical  therapy,  with  even  more  favorable  ratios  observed  among  sicker  patients  (INTERMACS  <  3).16  We hope that studies like ours can contribute valuable data to future  cost-effectiveness  or  cost-utility  analyses  based  on  real-world evidence.A major limitation of our study lies in its exclusive focus on direct healthcare costs, with limited attention to indirect costs (as  previously  discussed).  Although  hospitalizations  were  the primary financial driver for the patients included in this analysis, other direct costs—such as outpatient medication administration—were  not  accounted  for.  Additionally,  the  direct  hospital  costs  were  derived  from  a  single  publicly  funded center in southern Brazil, and the financial structure of this specific institution influenced the unit cost estimates used in our analysis.
9
lay  the  groundwork  for  future  economic  analyses  aimed  at  evaluating both existing and emerging healthcare technologies for advanced HF, with the ultimate goal of informing financially sustainable models of effective care.